Welcome to Computer Science 101! I'm Dr. Johnson.
Today we'll be introducing programming concepts.
Let me start by asking, what do you think programming is?
Writing code to make computers do things?
Solving problems using algorithms?
I'm not really sure, to be honest.
All good answers! Programming is essentially giving instructions to computers.
We'll be using Python this semester, which is a great first language.
I've heard Python is popular. Why is that?
Great question! Python is readable, versatile, and has excellent libraries.
It's used in data science, web development, AI, and more.
What about other languages like Java or C++?
Those are great languages too! We'll touch on them later.
But Python is perfect for learning fundamental concepts.
Let's start with our first program - Hello World!
What's Hello World?
It's a traditional first program that simply prints "Hello, World!"
It's a way to verify your programming environment is working.
Let me show you how to write it in Python.
We start with: print("Hello, World!")
That's it? That's a program?
Yes! It's simple but it's a complete program.
Let me show you how to run it.
I'll open my terminal and type: python hello.py
And there it is! "Hello, World!" printed to the screen.
That's pretty cool! Can we make it do more?
Absolutely! Let's add some variables and user input.
We can ask for the user's name and greet them personally.
Here's how: name = input("What's your name? ")
Then: print("Hello, " + name + "!")
What does the plus sign do?
Good question! The plus sign concatenates strings.
It joins the pieces of text together.
So if I type "Alice", it would print "Hello, Alice!"?
Exactly! Let me demonstrate.
I'll run the program and type "Alice" when prompted.
See? "Hello, Alice!" appears on the screen.
That's really neat! What else can we do?
We can do calculations, make decisions, repeat actions.
Let's try a simple calculator.
We can add two numbers: num1 = int(input("Enter first number: "))
num2 = int(input("Enter second number: "))
result = num1 + num2
print("The sum is:", result)
What's int() for?
Great question! int() converts the input to an integer.
input() always returns a string, even for numbers.
So we need to convert it to do math.
What happens if we don't convert it?
Good thinking! Let me show you.
If we enter 5 and 3 without int(), we get "53" instead of 8.
That's because "5" + "3" concatenates the strings.
Ah, that makes sense! What about other operations?
We can use -, *, / for subtraction, multiplication, division.
And ** for exponentiation, % for remainder.
Let's try a more complex example.
We can calculate the area of a circle.
radius = float(input("Enter radius: "))
area = 3.14159 * radius ** 2
print("Area:", area)
Why float() instead of int()?
Because radius can be a decimal number, like 2.5.
float() handles both integers and decimals.
This is getting more interesting!
It is! Programming is all about solving problems step by step.
Now let's talk about your first assignment.
You'll write a program that calculates the volume of a sphere.
What's the formula for that?
It's (4/3) * π * radius³. I'll give you the formula.
You'll need to use input(), float(), and print().
When is it due?
Next Wednesday at midnight. I'll post the details online.
Any questions about what we covered today?
I think I understand the basics now.
Me too. The examples really helped.
Excellent! Next week we'll learn about conditional statements.
That's where we can make our programs make decisions.
Have a great week everyone!
Class dismissed.